All
right. Let's start with your background. Could
you summarize your early background? Summarize
my early background? And how it prepared you for
being a test pilot and an astronaut.
A lot of luck was involved because my early
background consisted of doing just what I wanted
to do, which would be an airplane pilot. So when I
went to the University of Texas I took
aeronautical engineering because I thought it
would make me a better airplane pilot. So I was an
aeronautical engineer and then I went to Navy
flight training and then became a test pilot and
then ended up being an astronaut. So each step
built on the previous step, although a lot of it was
luck. Particularly the transition from test
pilot to astronaut because when I Began all this, I
never even thought about astronauts or space
flight or anything like that. Okay, you said you
went into NASA as a naval aviator. How important do
you feel that that was in your selection and also
your career? Would it have been different had you
gone in as a civilian? As a civilian or you mean an
Air Force or something like that? Well, no, just
basically as a civilian without the military, the
active military that you went in on. Well, now, to
be an astronaut, you've got to have, at that
period, you had to have lots of high-performance
aircraft flying equipment. You can only get that
in the military. So everybody that came in, came in
as someone
that had been in the military to amass the flight
experience. Once you were in, I don't think it
really made a lot of difference. as long as you were
perceived as a pilot kind of person. Because, for
example, Neil Armstrong came in as a civilian,
even though he had formerly been, I guess, in the
Navy. So I think as long as you were perceived as a
pilot kind of person, that it didn't make any
difference whether you were Air Force, Navy,
Marines, or civilian. All right. You spent 18
years at NASA, 1963 to 1981. How did your
participation or the role you played change over
those years?
Well, when you first get to NASA, you're in a very
much of a training situation where you're trying
to mostly understand what the job is you've been
hired to do. I mean, you want to go fly in space, but
you really don't have the opportunity and they
have you doing a lot of other support sorts of
things and training things. And so you're, at
least I was a little bit lost trying to understand
what my function was other than just, I kept
wanting somebody to tell me what to do, which they
never did. After you've been there a number, for a
while, then you're assigned to a flight crew Then
you begin training for a mission and that's, it's
harder work but it's simpler because you have a
certain thing to do in a certain length of time and
so you can sit down and determine how to do it. Now in
my case it was very fortunate because I work with
Pete Conrad, and he knew very much how to train for
missions and what to do on space missions, so he
taught me quite a lot, much more than maybe most of
the other people, just because he knows a lot. So in
that phase of your time there, as long as you're on a
flight crew, on a backup flight crew, you're
training for a mission or flying it or then getting
ready to train for the next one and So you're doing
that function which is the most interesting
function there and of course the function that you
always want to be in. Then after the Russian
mission, I was the backup commander of that
mission, then there was quite a way before anybody
flew in space shuttle. And so all of us were in a mode
where we worked on the space shuttle in an
engineering sense, engineering supports it. A
little bit like when I first came there, except
this time some of the new ones worked for me doing
the same thing. As time passed, they selected
people to fly the early shuttles, and I wasn't
selected to do that. I was selected to work with the
new astronaut candidates and serve sort of as an
administrative officer for all the astronauts.
So I did that for the last two years that I was at
NASA, and I enjoyed it very much. It would have been
very frustrating to me if I hadn't flown to be in
that role, but having flown to be in that role
was... nice, I enjoyed working with the people,
and it was sort of like paying a little of the debt I
had for having had some nice experiences, so all in
all, I felt my career at NASA was, although I would
never have done it exactly that way at the time,
looking back on it, it turned out really nice, so
I've been very happy about the 18 years, and felt
that Felt that I stayed long enough so that I was
ready to go. One of the things, I liked it being at
NASA and I wanted to make sure that I didn't leave
too early and then look back on it and wish that I
were still there. And that wasn't the case. I felt
like I was there until I finally said, you know,
it's time for me to go. So that felt good also. And
that's the way I feel now. Okay. What impact did
your career have on your family? Well, it had a big
impact on my family, although I'm not sure exactly
how it had the impact. If I just looked at the
results of my family, then I would say that it had a
big impact. First of all, I guess was my son, who
was, when I went to the moon, he was about, let's
see, I was 69. And, uh, he was born in 55, so that
would make him 14 years old. Um, seemed to have a big
effect on him. The fact that I was gone a lot, uh,
seemed to, um, seemed to make, seemed to make him,
uh, I don't know what aspect of it, but he grew up to
be a fairly rebellious, uh, son. And he, uh, He
never wanted, and still doesn't, tends to not want
to do things in the way he thinks that I might do
them. So he, somehow over this period, he got the
feeling that he wanted to live his life
differently than I did. Whether that would have
happened if I hadn't been in the space program or
not, I don't know. But that is an effect that
occurred. My daughter, who was seven years old
when I went to the moon, she didn't seem to bother
her so much. And so I see her as growing up in rather a
normal fashion and seems to behave... with good
and bad features of, uh, that, uh, of, uh, she's a
freshman at the university of Texas. So, and she's
probably going to do real well there. Uh, my
marriage, I was divorced about five years ago. And
I think probably the space program had a lot to do
with that in that, uh, when you're gone a lot and,
uh, the running of the family and the decisions
moves over to the woman, Then when you come back, as
I did five years or so after I got back, then the man
then wants to take over the decisions, and that
gets difficult because it's a lot more fun in a
family to make decisions than follow them. So I
think that the space program had a big effect on my
family, and whether or not it would have had it if I
had stayed in the Navy, I don't really know. But it
did, in fact, have a big effect. When you were
growing up, your generation was just ahead of the
youth movement and Vietnam War demonstrations.
Some of the newer astronauts today are from that
generation. Do you see any indication of the youth
trend in the 60s? Do you see any effects from that in
some of the newly chosen astronauts?
No, but it may be because I'm not sensitive to it. If
I talked with them about those issues, probably
they would have considerably different opinions
than maybe I have.
Since at NASA you tend to work on the space shuttle
and the job at hand, which has little to do with the
politics of things, you don't really know how
people feel about the politics of the matter. The
thing that I've noticed mostly about new
astronauts is the fact that women astronauts are
technically and mentally and emotionally just as
capable as male astronauts and that effect is sort
of surprising because I don't think women of my
generation most of them, or many of them, had the
same attitudes that would have let them be as good
professional astronauts as the women of this
particular generation. And it is just an
attitude. I mean, their attitude is... You know,
it goes without saying that I'm just as capable as
anybody else, regardless of sex. And then when you
watch them, they are just as capable. Perhaps in my
generation, since it would be more unusual, a
woman might have an attitude that says, I'm just as
capable as a man. And to have that attitude is not as
good as... just not even hardly thinking about it,
but having that feeling. So that's the big
difference I've noticed. I've also noticed that
the men and the women accept each other as the role
of astronaut, just as equals, and that's just the
way it is. There's no strain or anything else that
would make you think that... The male astronauts
think the female astronauts don't belong or
anything like that. How has the training changed
through the presence of women? It's not changed
much at all. The thing that occurred when we got
women is we realized that many of them were smaller
than the men and also that they weren't as strong in
the arms and hands. So what we did was... was make
sure that everything that had to be operated in
space shuttle, like the space suits, the controls
and all that, would work with the female size body
and also with typical female strength. And once we
did that, then
the training is pretty much the same. If you take a
job that requires this kind of strength, the man
can probably do it more easily than the woman just
because he's stronger. But both of them can still
do it adequately. I relate it in my own mind to... to
trucks getting power steering. Once trucks got
power steering, women could drive trucks just as
easily as men and were just as good as drivers.
Before that, it was difficult because the actual
job of steering a truck was so physically
demanding. I feel that their training is no
different. you relate to a woman astronaut just
like she's a male astronaut and uh nobody asks for
special favors you don't see everybody treats the
women nicely but i mean you they never ask to be uh
excused from anything difficult or don't uh seem
to feel that they have any uh special um called to
get any extra treatment or soft treatment. And so
everybody does the job, and it seems to work out
real well. The Apollo program's goal is to send man
to the moon. After this was accomplished, what was
the change, or did you notice any in public
opinion, Congress's attitude also towards NASA
and the manned program? Well, my feeling is that
the public attitude towards anything is largely
controlled by what the president wants, and then
when the newspapers and television people sense
what he wants, then they kind of jump on the
bandwagon. So, and Congress is sort of separate,
and they... They have their own opinion. For
example, I think that Congress related to the
space program is just as much in favor of it as they
ever were, and they always give you as much money as
the president asked for, and they do things that
the president wants done, and no problem at all.
The problem we have is getting our budget... what
we're looking for to have the president say that's
what he's looking for. So any cuts we've ever
received have been from the president himself.
I think that
then when the president does have an attitude, and
then that is carried along to the rest of the
people. For example, if he starts talking about,
if he started talking to Mara about the fact we
needed a space station. He was very enthusiastic
about it and said we told a bunch of good reasons why
and there are a bunch of good reasons why we should
do it and there are a bunch of good reasons why we
shouldn't. If he started talking about the good
ones tomorrow and kept after it for a while and was
committed to it, pretty soon the newspapers would
talk about it all the time and everybody in the U.S.
suddenly would be in favor of it and would talk
about how wonderful and how the space program is
going crazy and they like it and that's what they
thought about. If he doesn't do that, which he
hasn't, then they, in my opinion, don't perceive
it that way. And everyone sort of begins to say, why
is the space program different than it was? They
personally don't feel any different, but they've
been barraged by the statement from the press that
it's different, that they wonder why it's
different. So you seldom meet a person that
doesn't feel about the space program just as he did
in Apollo. That is... If they were in favor of it
then, they're in favor of it now. And if they
weren't then, they weren't now. So you've got to
say, generally, public opinion is probably about
the same from the individual. How did that opinion
affect the objectives of the pilot program? Did
that affect what you thought you could do or what
you said you could do in that program? Concern for
those opinions? Well, the opinion allowed you...
Well, the opinion was that we were going to do
whatever we had to do to get to the moon and back. And
we're going to give you the money to do it. The
minute you have that opinion, then you can go out
and do whatever is necessary to get to the moon and
back. And you know you can. So you have an attitude
of, you know, I can do it because you know you can. If
Midway and Apollo, the president decided not to
support it for one reason or another... then it
would have changed our attitude because we
immediately would know we wouldn't have the money
to do it. We wouldn't have the support. So even
though technically we could do it, we wouldn't
have been able to. We'd have had to not do it. Like
now we know we could go to Mars, but nobody wants to
do it. Nobody's gonna pay to do it. So it's not like
we're running around saying, NASA's running
around saying, you know, we can go to Mars. I mean,
you could, but nobody's going to pay. So really,
you'd have to say we can't. It doesn't have the
popular support. You need popular support to get
the money. Once you get the money, you can do it. If
everybody in the country were against you and you
still had the money,
you could go get it done because you could hire
people to do it. probably not as efficient because
people wouldn't dedicate themselves, but still
in all, with the right amount of money, you could
buy the technology to do it. Okay, Congress also,
in the late 60s, cut back on appropriations, which
cut out the last three Apollo flights. Looking
back on that, do you feel that was a good, bad
decision? I mean, how do you feel now about that?
that cut in your budget? Well, I feel that that's
what Congress is there for. They're there to
decide where money should be spent. And the fact
they wanted to cut those out,
I think from somebody in the space program, they
wish they hadn't. But at the same time,
from Congress's point of view, they wish they did
and did. I mean, I don't... I don't ever think that,
personally, that one of my favorite sayings is,
history draws straight with crooked lines, which
fundamentally means that things eventually
happen or don't happen no matter what human beings
try to do about it. So even though they vote money or
don't vote money over the next 10 years, man is
going to slowly get out into space. He's going to
find ways to make it profitable, and he's going to
go out there more and more. And whether it takes
place 10 years from now or 20 years from now, it
isn't going to make any difference. Any more than
it'd make any difference if Columbus discovered
America in 1910. 1592 or 1492. I mean, who cares?
And it was important at that moment. But sooner or
later, somebody would have found out the world was
round and come over here. If it hadn't been
Columbus, it would have been somebody else. If we
don't go up into space in the next 10 years, if we
don't fly the last three flights to the moon, you
know, who cares? Someday people will live on the
moon and they'll never worry. It's like wondering
why... three or four white Columbus didn't take
eight ships instead of three. I mean, at the
moment, at the point, he could have said as he left
the country, well, look, I could start settling
the New World myself if I find it. However, we look
back now, we don't know. I mean, we can't even tell
he had three ships or a hundred. So I don't really
worry about that sort of thing. Plus, I don't think
the individual, unless he's president... can do
anything about it. And I think it's good not to
worry about things you can't do anything about
because it is needless worry. You were one of 12 men
to walk on the moon. Ten years later, it's almost a,
what do we have here today? So what kind of thing?
What is there today that is a result of that? What is
the legacy? What is the legacy? Good question. I
think the legacy of going to the moon is just a good
feeling in everybody's heart that America can do
the things it wants to do. I think that's probably
the number one thing we got from it. The other is it
gives us a good feeling about what we can do in the
future. I think most of exploration has to do with
just man feeling good about himself and...
wanting to do it and it lifts the human spirit and he
feels good and thinks good about it and you start
talking about Apollo program to anybody now they
start you can see them brighten up they think about
when they were where they were during Apollo and
they think about where they were during the first
landing and they like it it makes them feel good
about America and it makes them feel good about
themselves and Even the ones that don't like the
space program like that. So I think that's what you
get from something like that. Eventually, of
course, people will move out into space and live.
And so you could then say, well, if we didn't have
the space program, it would have taken that much
longer to go out there and begin to have
settlements on the moon. But I don't think that's
really important in the long run when you do it. You
think all the money and everything else is worth it
for the feeling? Oh, yeah. I think so. I think
probably more than that because a country's
ability to survive or not depends a lot on mental
attitude. If you feel like you're a worthy country
and that you can lick anything and that nobody can
beat you down... and that you can solve any problem
and that you're the greatest country in the world
and you're willing to sacrifice for it, that you
probably can do that. But if you get to feeling like
despair and that other people are beating you and
that you don't do anything right and there's
really no use in trying for good goals even just
because they're good, then I think that's what
happens. You know, most countries don't get...
wiped out from the outside they sort of decay from
the inside and lose their spirit and everything
and then somebody comes in from the outside and
takes them but before that happens they've lost
their spirit and I think things like Apollo keep
keep your spirit up and keep you feeling competent
and good and worthy and all those things like right
now you just read so much about how the United
States has difficulty, can't do this. You know,
really we can, but
it's just what people write about or what they talk
about. And Apollo, they think how great we were,
how great this country is. So I think it's worth
that. And I think we ought to keep doing that
because we need things like that. You need things
that...
You know, the human body needs food to keep itself
physically strong, and it needs exercise, and it
needs something on its mind to be mentally strong
and mentally feel good. And I think Apollo made
this, you know, gave us good mental vibes. Even you
talk about it now, it gives you good vibes. You're
doing a report on something that happened 10 years
ago, and... You know, it makes you feel good. If you
did one on the Vietnam War, we'd all feel bad. So
that's what you need. You've got to have things
that are good going on, and you have to pay for them.
Nothing's free, and so if you want something good
going on, you're going to have to sacrifice and pay
for it. You also played a key role in Skylab. What do
you think its main returns are besides proving
that man can stay in space for long periods of time?
Well, there's some scientific return. I don't
know that all that's really important. I don't
know. I guess it's once again the good feeling you
get about being part of progress and being part of
great adventures and moving civilization along
in a good way. Of course, when you do all this, you
build your technology and everything so that you
maybe can defend yourself better if some country
tried to take you over. I don't think that's as
important. But I think a lot of it just has to do with
doing something that's good. I mean, you can spend
your life trying to clean up the slums. You ain't
going to make it. As someone said, Johnson's War on
Poverty, poverty won. It did. He spent millions of
dollars, got us in difficulties and he was going to
clean up poverty and I don't know how much poverty
he cleaned up, probably not all that much because
it's still around and we've kind of forgotten the
war on poverty. It probably cost a hell of a lot more
than going to the moon back, okay? But... But we
remember going to the moon. It makes us feel good.
So I think we ought to spend a lot of money to help
poor people, but we're going to have to spend a lot
of money to help everybody have a good feeling,
too. I mean, there's more to life than eating. And
you ought to be able to eat, and then you ought to be
able to have some things for the human spirit. And I
believe things like Apollo are really great for
the human spirit. It makes us feel good. Okay,
going back to the selection process, how did it
have to change for the inclusion of women? Was
there physical requirements that had to change?
Was that basically the only... Well, we knew that
there weren't women that had the background. With
the shuttle, we knew we were going to need two kinds
of people. We were going to need the kind of people
to fly it, And then we're going to need the kind of
people to be the scientists in it or the part
scientist, part technician. And so we realized
there weren't any women pilots at the moment,
although they're coming along now, that had the
flying experience equal to the men. We didn't care
whether they were women and men. We were looking
for the best qualified. So we knew we wouldn't get
any women there, although we know in the future we
will because women are getting in airlines and the
military flying and all that other stuff. Then the
next thing was looking for the best scientist. And
we then tried to be completely arbitrary
in that we tried to pick out the best scientists
available without regard to the fact they were
woman or man. In other words, we... We rated
everybody according to their desirability
without referencing whether they were a man or a
woman. Now that's hard to do because you know
you're like some women. coming in in addition to
men. But that was sort of the effort. So I'm sure
what we did was end up with a good combination of the
best people, of which some of them fortunately
turned out to be women. As I watched the new
astronauts, I felt that some of the best ones there
were women. I mean, I didn't feel like we had a bunch
of great guys, you know, and then we had number
women that work too grand you know but we had to take
him anyway I never felt that way and I was work close
with it closely with him for a number of years I felt
that some of the women were the very best there and
the one characteristic I noticed about the women I
felt as a group that they worked harder than the men
and maybe they had to do that to make it as a woman I
don't know but if you evaluated what they were
doing on the weekend or after hours or something,
they usually were doing, taking flying lessons or
running. I mean, they spent more of their waking
hours becoming good astronauts than the men did, I
felt. Although the men were tremendously
dedicated, maybe when you find a dedicated woman,
she is even more dedicated. So that was impressive
to me. What about the other minorities? There's
blacks and Hispanic. Do you see any difference at
all, I guess, with the WASP and the minority? I
think the backgrounds of the minorities
seem more different.
The background they bring... to the astronaut
corps seems more different from the older
astronauts than the women bring to the astronaut
corps. So I think maybe, and all of them are not the
same either, some are more closer to the same
background in most of the WASP and some are further
away. I think their adjustment into the corps
probably
probably is more difficult than the women.
However, the individuals we brought were very
adaptable anyway, because they essentially made
it in a white man's world. Not our world, but the
outside world. So that indicates they're smart,
dedicated, and they know how to adapt. But I still
think that their job of integrating Not because of
prejudice either. I don't think you see that. I
really don't see any prejudice around there. But
just because of their background and
experiences, I think they probably had a more
difficult time integrating into the astronaut
corps than the women did. Can you just basically
maybe go over the selection process, just the
areas that you look at in the selection process?
Say education. I've never been on a selection
board, so that's one thing. I don't know for sure.
But what it appears to do is you have a number of
categories like physical condition or physical
abilities professional abilities and then
finally sort of an intangible attitude abilities
and so for example you give all your
candidates a finalist some number that you
determine are the best of the group physical
examinations uh physical tests such as hearing
such as blood tests such as uh running such as all
sorts of things to look at how they are physically
and then when you do that then you give them sort of a
grade of like one to two hundred and uh If a person
was perfect in everything, I guess he'd get 100.
But let's say if you're really good, you'd
probably get 90 or 85. Sometimes if you have some
disease or some abnormality that would drop you
below a certain level, then no matter how much you
made in the other two areas, you couldn't make it
because your physical condition wouldn't be good
enough. But you get a certain numerical rating,
let's say. And that's further broken down into
areas like fiscal conditioning, where a person
could improve that. Where blood pressure, maybe
they can't. vision uh maybe they can or can't you
know things like that then you look at background
you just take a look and see what people have done in
the past what opportunities they've had to do
things for example we took people that have been
out of school a long time so their experience level
they ought to get a pretty good rating however we
did take some people recently out of college with
advanced degrees and they really had done little
other than be in college and uh and get their
degree. So they didn't have an opportunity to,
let's say, make a nice discovery or write 100
papers because they hadn't been out. So you give a
grade relative to their professional competence
by
the fact that we have people that are competent in
those fields and they can talk to them and they can
go talk with their professors or the people they
work with and determine how they stack up. Then you
bring them in and you have their ratings for
general attitude. You interview them. You talk
with them about what they've been doing and you can
see how much of their life they've been devoting
to. trying to be this kind of a person, an astronaut
kind of person, how they view it, what they would
be. And so you can get an idea of, is this the kind of
person you'd like being an astronaut working with
you? Now, when they come in to be an astronaut, they
have an idea of what, what it takes to do the job. We
have an idea of what it takes to do the job. And, uh,
Somehow you've got to pick a number of people that
you want to work with you on doing these
exploration jobs, these astronaut things. I
don't think you end up taking the smartest people.
You don't take the physically fit people, most
physically fit people. Maybe they happen to come
in. But what you end up taking are the people that
you think that you can work with to get the job done
the best. And I think sometimes that a lot of it just
has to do with whether people that are there know
you or know of your attitudes and know how
cooperative you are and that you're a good team
player and a lot of intangibles that make it
difficult to pinpoint. All these things are sort
of given points and you add up the points and at the
end you... You take a look at the ones that have the
highest points and you try to take them. And you may
have to do some juggling because maybe the fifth
one down is the fourth geologist you've got among
the top five and you don't really need that many
geologists. So maybe you take that person and
don't take him and go below him and take someone
else because you really need an astronomer. And so
maybe take the highest ranking astronomer who
could be further down. So there's a lot of... give
and take and a lot of it just boils down to is this the
kind of person i'd like to work with and and that's
true not only astronaut corps but it's true in
every walk of life a lot of what you get in life has to
do with how people perceive you as being
cooperative or like them or you'd fit in and they
can't they can't know either i mean they don't know
how you're really going to fit in and uh That's how
the selection... And when women were taken, it was
the same thing exactly. I mean, they couldn't run
as far maybe. Some could run further than the guys,
but same kind of thing. And so there was really not a
lot of changes for the women. So it's mostly
attitude then, just selecting. I think it's a lot.
Yeah, I think that if you had to... As long as you...
You can't be physically...
If you're physically bad, no matter what your
attitude is, you've had it. If you're
professionally incompetent, no matter what your
attitude is, you've had it. But there's many more
people that have those two than you can ever take.
So I think the thing you can hope to do... is if you
have those two, which many do, then it's mostly
attitude, and I've found that to be true in life,
period. I mean, it's the attitude of the people
that really make the difference, and it's funny,
at least my experience has been looking at
successful people, they all kind of have the same
attitude, most of them. You'll find an unusual one
now and then that's pretty weird, but mostly they
have good attitudes, and... Even if they might not
have a good attitude to people outside their field
or somebody that's not working with them, to the
people they work with, they have a good attitude.
Because good people wouldn't work with them if
they didn't. Because they don't want to be around
people that aren't nice. I wouldn't. If I was
around somebody I didn't like very quickly, I'd
say, hey, I've got to go somewhere, and I'd just go.
I wouldn't want to be around them. And that is the
case there, too. That's the number one thing to
work on, I think. It's hard to do, but it's
profitable if you can do it. Wouldn't you say that?
Now, this is a dog with a good attitude. See this
attitude? Sweet doggy. It seems to me that NASA
falls into the realms of science, but until
recently, scientists really weren't accepted
into the program. Why would you say that that is?
Well, I think that was because they began with no
scientists. And the group that was
in control were non-scientists. And so they were
more familiar with non-scientists, pilots. And
so naturally they felt more comfortable and felt
one of the rules of life is people tend to like
people like themselves. I mean, a banker may not be
as crazy about other bankers, but he's
comfortable with them. And if he runs into a person
that likes the same kind of thing he does and works
about as hard as he does and all that, they tend to
like that person and feel that person is good. So
I think that was the case. If NASA had started out
with a bunch of scientists... then pilots would
have had difficulty because scientists would
have viewed pilots as flighty or hot shot. Whereas
maybe pilots viewed scientists as studious,
not loose enough. I don't know what, but I mean,
It's normal. It's just like Americans view
Frenchmen as. Frenchmen view Americans as. And we
all know that there's just as many Frenchmen just
like us as there are Americans. So it's just the way
it is, and it's gradually changing, see, because
we got some early scientists in, your father, for
example. He had to kind of break the ice. Now, you
know, the scientists... People don't think of
them quite so different as they did before. It's
just part of life, you know. I mean, if you go on a
football team and everybody's 6'3", and you're
5'10", you're different. And if you go on another
team where everybody's 5'10", and you're 6'3",
you're different, and you're going to have
trouble fitting in. It's just the way of human
nature. Okay, NASA's civilian organization, how
has its role drifted towards the military in
recent years? Well, I don't really think NASA's
role has drifted towards the military. What has
occurred is the military is going to use the
shuttle. So NASA's off here trying to get money so
they can build the shuttle. And so in order to get
money from the Air Force or the military, they've
got to satisfy their requirements. So they have to
go with them and say, in order to give us money for
the shuttle, what has it got to do? And the military
says, well, it's got to fly this far across range.
It's got to carry this much load and this and that.
And NASA would try to talk them out of it if it was
different from their own goals. If they couldn't,
they'd then accept it. But I don't think... I can't
tell NASA's any more... I don't think NASA's any
more military. Don't forget the heads of NASA are
not military at all, generally. So they don't want
to be military. They don't... Once again, they...
They want... They like civilians. They like them.
Now, there's a few military sprinkled around, and
they like them. But if those military people don't
act pretty much like civilians, they're going to
remove them and put civilians in. So... I haven't
seen NASA move to a more military way. It may be, and
I just don't notice it. I think even if you're here a
while as a military, very soon you become a
civilian. I was there 18 years, and I felt I wasn't
military after two or three years. I just didn't do
military things. Let's
get Rush into this now. How did Rush's
accomplishments in the early 60s affect our
astronauts' attitudes and determination to make
our program be successful?
I don't know. I guess it affected just like it did
everybody else. We wanted to be the best country in
the world, so we worked at it. I don't think, I think
the astronauts would have felt that way anyway. I
think those sorts of things have more of a public
opinion. I never wanted to do anything because the
Russians did. I mean, I never felt as an astronaut.
I never in training or in flying a mission ever
thought to myself, I got to do a little bit better
because Russians are trying. I mean, I'm sure that
football players say, I got to do better because
the opposing team, you know. But Russians, you
never see them and you don't really know that
you're competing and they're far away. So you
really... You really don't know. I don't think it
had any attitude on astronauts. I think it had a
heck of an effect on presidents and Congress and
people, general people. Well, it's not that
important, but we did try to assess their program
and its progress. How accurate do you think the
intelligence that we got was in the 60s of their
program? I think it was probably pretty good. I
think it was good enough so that we realized that we
better get off our duffs and get into space. I think
the one thing that I remember that had to do with the
Russians was back in the end of 1969, intelligence
said that they were gonna send a Soyuz spacecraft
around the moon. Not orbit it, but just go around it
once and back. And when that occurred, people at
NASA got a big idea to get Apollo 8 out to the moon
before they did. But that wasn't astronauts.
Astronauts didn't even know it was. I remember
when they told us they were going to do it. I mean, it
just was a big surprise. We weren't even thinking
about it. We were over-training. And the crew that
went over and did it, Frank Borman's crew, they
were training astronauts. They were training
behind us. And
when we heard they were going to fly before us, that
was kind of disappointing. But, you know, we were
so busy training, it really didn't make us any
difference at all. We just said, gosh, wonder why.
It was only later on we heard the Russians might do
it. And then we hoped to beat the Russians, but, you
know, we didn't. There's nothing we could do.
Thank you.